CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

To run formatting and static analysis checks automatically on commit, this repository uses `pre-commit` hooks. If `pre-commit` is not already installed, you can get it via `pip`:

```sh
pip install pre-commit
```

Once installed, set up the hooks with the configuration in
`.pre-commit-config.yaml` using:

```sh
pre-commit install
```

You can also run all checks manually with:

```sh
pre-commit run --all-files
```


Formal models describing parts of the system live under the `formal/`
directory. See `doc/formal_models.md` for instructions on building and
extending these models.

## Running the Test Suite

All Python and C integration tests reside under the `tests/` directory and are
executed with `pytest`. After installing the development dependencies run:

```sh
pytest -v
```

Tests compile small helper programs using `clang` so a working C toolchain must
be available. The `pytest.ini` configuration ensures each file following
`test_*.py` naming is automatically discovered.

Commit message:

add stub arbitration tests and document pytest

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

To run formatting and static analysis checks automatically on commit, this repository uses `pre-commit` hooks. If `pre-commit` is not already installed, you can get it via `pip`:

```sh
pip install pre-commit
```

Once installed, set up the hooks with the configuration in
`.pre-commit-config.yaml` using:

```sh
pre-commit install
```

You can also run all checks manually with:

```sh
pre-commit run --all-files
```


Formal models describing parts of the system live under the `formal/`
directory. See `doc/formal_models.md` for instructions on building and
extending these models.

## Running the Test Suite

All Python and C integration tests reside under the `tests/` directory and are
executed with `pytest`. After installing the development dependencies run:

```sh
pytest -v
```

Tests compile small helper programs using `clang` so a working C toolchain must
be available. The `pytest.ini` configuration ensures each file following
`test_*.py` naming is automatically discovered.  When creating new test
directories remember to add an `__init__.py` file so the package is
importable by pytest.
